###Topic
Reproductive Physiology
###Category
Steroid Hormones
###Concept
Hormone Biosynthesis
###Question
A 17 year old female visits her GP because she has not started her periods yet. Her GP takes a history, examines her and requests a number of blood tests including the levels of oestrogen, progesterone and testosterone. Why are these hormones all found bound to proteins in the circulation?
###Answer
They are cholesterol based
###Choice
They are alcohol based
###Choice
They are all produced in the adrenal cortex
###Choice
They are unable to cross the plasma membrane
###Choice
They have a high affinity for albumin
###Explanation
_Correct answer: “They are cholesterol based”_
Oestrogen, progesterone and testosterone are all steroid hormones. All steroid hormones have a common cholesterol precursor, differing in the structure of the ring and the side-chains attached to it.

Being derived from cholesterol means that steroid hormones are not water soluble. Therefore steroids will travel in the circulation bound to transporter proteins; the majority of oestrogen, progesterone and testosterone will be found bound to sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG), and a smaller proportion bound to albumin.

The enzymatic modification of cholesterol occurs on the inner mitochondrial membrane; the rate-limiting step of this process is the transport of free cholesterol from the cytoplasm to the membrane, which is enabled by steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR). For all steroids the first step is the conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone by the enzyme desmolase, then further CYP450 enzymes in the smooth ER will catalyse the transformations into the different variations of steroid hormones.

Other steroid hormones include the mineralocorticoids such as aldosterone, which regulates fluid-balance and blood pressure, and the glucocorticoids, such as cortisol, the ‘stress hormone’. These two classes of steroids are produced in the adrenal cortex along with the androgen hormones - although testosterone (an androgen) is produced in the testes. Oestrogen and progesterone are predominately produced in the female ovaries or the placenta during pregnancy, with less significant amounts coming from the adrenal cortex and peripheral tissue.

_Incorrect answers explained:_
If steroid hormones were derived from alcohol and not cholesterol then they would be water soluble, and would not need to be transported by proteins in plasma.

The adrenal cortex is the site of some steroid hormone synthesis, namely aldosterone and cortisol, but other steroids are produced in the gonads. Their site of production does not explain why the steroid hormones are protein bound.

Being cholesterol based, the steroid hormones are lipid-soluble, and this enables them to diffuse across the plasma membrane and enter the cell. All steroid hormones have their action either within the cytoplasm or the nucleus of their target cells.

Steroid hormones are transported for the most part by sex hormone binding globulin; only a small amount is bound to albumin in the plasma.
